--- PAGE 1 ---
STAT3600 Linear Statistical Analysis
Tutorial 7 Variable Selection, Polynomial and Interaction Regression
THE UNIVERSITY OF HONG KONG
DEPARTMENT OF STATISTICS AND ACTUARIAL SCIENCE
STAT3600 Linear Statistical Analysis
Tutorial 7 Variable Selection, Polynomial and Interaction Regression
1 Variable Selection
1. Motivation of variable selection
2. The objective is to investigate whether a subset of explanatory variables should be excluded in
an existing full model. Not all variables are useful to predict response variable. Regression aims
to find a mode which is easy to interpret and with smaller SSE.
Different criteria for selecting best model
Given a total of k explanatory variables, there could be a total of 2k
− 1 models for explaining
the response variable. So we have to propose several criteria for comparison of these models.
There are four popular criteria for model selection which are summarized in the following table.
Method
Criteria
Meaning
Remarks
Coefficient of R 2 largest
largest
Better Fit R 2 ↔
given
Determination p
Better Prediction
̸= smallest SSE
R 2 = SS Rp /SS T p ↑→R 2 ↑
0 ≤R 2 ≤1
Adjusted R 2
largest
Better Fit R 2
a largest
↔
a
Coefficient of
(with adjustment
smallest MSE
Determination R 2
for the number of
a can be negative.
R 2
a
= 1−[(1−R 2)(n−1)/(n−p−1)] explanatory variables) penalty for more variables.
and
smallest bias in
Mallow’s Cp small Cp Full model:
Statistic Cp ≈p + predicted value
1 Cp
= k + 1
Cp
= SS Ep /M S Ek−(n−2p−2) penalty for more variables.
small Cp more important than close to p + 1
AIC information
BIC information
AI C=−2l n L + 2r B I C=−2l n L + r l n (n ) minimize AIC
minimze BIC
Maximize the likelihood,
with penalty for more
explanatory variables.
no strict rule on the choice
between AIC and BIC.
penalty for more variables.
works with likelihood approach.
3. Sequential methods
(a) Forward selection method
Start with model with no independent variables(intercept included). Add the most signifi-
cant variables based on criterion until no variables added.
(b) Backward elimination method
Start with full model. Remove the most insignificant variable based on criterion until no
variables removed.
The University of Hong Kong
Department of Statistics and Actuarial Science
1
--- PAGE 2 ---
STAT3600 Linear Statistical Analysis
Tutorial 7 Variable Selection, Polynomial and Interaction Regression
(c) Stepwise method
Start with model with no independent variables. Add the most significant variable based
on entry criterion Then remove the most insignificant variable based on removal criterion.
Until neither criterion is met.
Note: Entry criterion should be more strict than removal criterion.
2 Polynomial and Interaction regression
1. Polynomial regression
Yi = β0 + β1Xi + β2X 2
i +... + βp X p
i + εi
2. Interaction regression
Y = β0 + β1X1 + ... + βp Xp + β12X1X2 + ... + βp−1,p Xp−1Xp + ε
Solve it by constructing a new X from original data.
3 Exercise
Aerobic fitness (measured by the ability to consume oxygen) is fit to some simple exercise tests. The
goal is to develop an equation to predict fitness based on the exercise tests rather than on expensive
and cumbersome oxygen consumption measurements. Seven measurements were made on men in-
volved in a physical fitness course at N.C. State University. They are age (years, X1), weight (kg, X2),
oxygen intake rate (ml per kg body weight per minute, Y ), time to run 1.5 miles (minutes, X3), heart
rate while resting (X4), heart rate while running (same time oxygen rate measured, X5), and maximum
heart rate recorded while running (X6).
Y = oxygen intake rate (ml per kg body weight per minute)
X1 = age (years)
X2 = weight (in kg)
X3 = time to run 1.5 miles (in minutes)
X4 = heart rate while resting
X5 = heart rate while running
X6 = maximum heart rate recorded while running
(1) (2) (3) (4) Fit a multiple linear regression model on the oxygen intake rate.
Are the variables as a whole effective in explaining the variation in Y ?
Formulate a reduced model by excluding the insignificant explanatory variable(s) and produce
an ANOVA table for comparing the full model and the reduced model.
Perform a F test for the reduced model against the full model. What is your conclusion?
The University of Hong Kong
Department of Statistics and Actuarial Science
2
